---
layout: pages
title: Culture and Mental Health   
description: Learn how our Culture Impacts how we Navigate and Discuss Mental Health    
permalink: /cultureandmentalhealth
---

Our culture and where we come from mold our understanding of the world. These include how we dress, talk, and how we interact with others. When discussing mental health our culture shapes how we navigate challenges, respond to distress, and how we get help. Cultural psychology is a branch of psychology that can help us understand how our culture also affects our understanding of mental health. Even though cultural psychology is a relatively new field, it has changed the idea that psychology is universal. This is supported by Wolfradt (2024) as he argues that “cultural psychology is not about the epistemological claim for objective truth, but about the exploration of culture-specific forms of understanding reality, which are expressed in interpretations and practices.” This is also supported by Bhugra, Watson, and Wijesuriya (2021) as they argue that: “There is little doubt that cultures also affect the way we experience distress, the way in which we express distress and also where we seek help from.” 

The Oxford English Dictionary defines a culture shock as  “A state of distress or disorientation brought about by sudden immersion in or subjection to an unfamiliar culture.” And many students suffer in that journey to learn a brand new culture. Zukauska (2024) points out some possible symptoms of someone experiencing culture shock, this include: anxiety, sadness, loneliness, and homesickness. Zukauska also argues that there are four set phases for cultural adjustment: honeymoon phase, crisis phase, recovery phase, and adjustment phase. However, other authors challenge this idea of a linear way of understanding culture shock. Ward, Bochner, and Furnham explore this in their book The Psychology of Culture Shock (2001). They demonstrate that cultural adjustment is not a linear process and varies across individuals. In fact, they propose a new understanding of what culture shock is. Normally culture shocks were seen as negative and passive reactions to a new environment. Instead Ward, Bochner, and Furnham highlight how “we have treated people’s responses to unfamiliar cultural environments as an active process of dealing with change.” (282). Changes in educational experiences are also important culture shocks students face when adapting to a new educational system, language, and set of expectations. Carol and Ryan (2005) identify how our social and cultural schemas shape how we view and experience learning, making it difficult for international students to thrive in a new learning environment. This is really important as Carol and Ryan argue that “Some international students may not realise the ‘rules’ have changed and most will start out using behaviours and assumptions that have served them well as learners up to this point. This may mean encountering unpleasant surprises” (26) Because some cultures value independent work over collaboration and the creation of essays as a big part of grading it can be hard to adapt to those expectations and that can lead to more stress, anxiety, etc. This idea that changes to academic cultures and expectations can be explained by studies like Clarks. In her study Clarke (2023) identifies that stress, anxiety, depression, and homesickness are factors that negatively affect the academic performance of international students while comparing them to non-international students. She then concludes that there needs to be changes and that “The implications of failing to support the specific needs of international graduate students are vast, as attrition continues to be a significant concern in graduate education”. 

All of these sources help us understand how culture plays an essential role in shaping how we experience, discuss, and navigate mental health. This process is also variable based on each person and culture.  With that in mind, it's important that we understand each person's perspective so institutions can create better support systems. To get a better understanding of cultural differences, many studies could implement qualitative approaches that will help understand those different perspectives and needs. The University of Guelph has already made changes to their task force that focuses on students' mental health. In their report they recognize that in order to identify needs and gaps they will complement their quantitative evaluations with qualitative approaches. This will amplify the voices of international students to see how to allocate resources.   


<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/Rtet5twQpec?si=EMrUHlfsYfavswpv" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>

---

### Bibliography   
1. Bhugra, Dinesh, Cameron Watson, and Rajiv Wijesuriya. 2021. “Culture and Mental Illnesses.” International Review of Psychiatry 33 (1–2): 1–2. doi:10.1080/09540261.2020.1777748.https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/citedby/10.1080/09540261.2020.1777748?scroll=top&needAccess=true
2. Clarke, Kathleen. 2023. “International Graduate Students’ Mental Health Diagnoses, Challenges, and Support: A Descriptive Comparison to Their Non-International Graduate Student Peers”. Journal of International Students 13 (3): 280-304. https://doi.org/10.32674/jis.v13i3.3148.
3. Jude Carroll, and Janette Ryan. 2005. Teaching International Students : Improving Learning for All. Routledge. EBSCOhost. https://ocul-gue.primo.exlibrisgroup.com/permalink/01OCUL_GUE/1gg5hgs/alma9953208469605154  
4. Ward, Colleen A, Stephen Bochner, and Adrian Furnham. The Psychology of Culture Shock. 2nd ed. Routledge, 2001. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203992258. 
5. Wolfradt, Uwe. (2024). Cultural Psychology: Theoretical and Historical Considerations. In: Wolfradt, Uwe, Lars Allolio-Näcke, and Paul Sebastian Ruppel. Cultural Psychology : An Introduction. 1st ed. 2024. Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden, 2024. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-658-45155-4_1 
6. Oxford English Dictionary, “culture shock (n.),” December 2025, https://doi.org/10.1093/OED/4710072805.
7. Zukauskas, Rebecca  Sparling. “Culture Shock.” EBSCO, 2024. https://www.ebsco.com/research-starters/communication-and-mass-media/culture-shock.
8. Burnett, Alison, Andrew Papadopoulos, Jillian Stringer, and Abhinand Thaivalappil. Rep. PRESIDENT’S TASK FORCE ON STUDENT MENTAL HEALTH, 2023. https://api.liveugconthub.uoguelph.dev/sites/default/files/2024-06/student-mental-health-aoda-compliant.pdf. 
