---
layout: pages
title: Mental Health Challenges  
description: Learn About Unique Mental Health Challenges International Students Encounter  
permalink: /mentalhealthchallenges
---

Psychological frameworks help us understand various mental health disorders that affect international students. As a result we can understand the unique challenges international students go through. Tan et al. (2025) identify risk factors influencing international students' mental health, such as linguistic challenges, separation from family, and discrimination, while focusing on specific mental health disorders like homesickness, stress, and depression. Wang et al (2023) identify the most common stressors and how they display those symptoms. They argue that sleep quality and financial crisis are among the most impactful stressors, with sleep quality also leading to “anxiety symptoms, but also the association between sleep quality and depression symptoms” They also argue that financial problems lead to even worse outcomes such as being “more likely to drop out of the university or achieve lower grades than others, which may cause serious stress to the students.” Problems with finance were also explored by the Public reports from the Canadian Bureau for International Education (2024) as they identified widespread concerns around financial strain, loneliness, and unstable housing among international students. 

Amanvermez et al. (2023) document how international students feel more stress in certain situations compared to non-internationals students. The study showed how international students feel more stress compared to non international students in four main situations: financial situations, love life, relationship with family, and health problems of loved ones. The one that had a significant difference between international students and non-international students was health problems of loved ones. Because international students are far away from their loved ones and there is no easy way to support them thanks to conflicting time zones or limited communication options, this creates an environment where international students feel an increased sense of stress.  
Kim et al. (2018) show that a lack of social support and chronic academic strain are leading predictors of burnout among international students. Kim et al argue that students suffer from burnout and as a result  “students display a state of emotional exhaustion, cynicism, and feeling of inefficacy” that, paired with other emotions, make it difficult to succeed socially, academically, and in other areas. 

But this approach of studying mental health challenges through numbers and studies that focus on results instead of focusing on specific events and experiences that cause those challenges does not tell us the full story, but they work as a great introduction to those issues. A great example of this can be the CBC article by Melanie Green (2017) ”Crying your guts out': some international students fear seeking help for burnout” In this article we get a first-hand example of how different the narrative can be when you hear stories directly from international students. In the article an international student tells his story on how getting help could lead to difficulties when applying for a work permit or permanent residency after graduation. Green goes as far as to say “any recorded mental health issue is subject to scrutiny from immigration.” This is something that the studies explored through this essay do not explore, the fact that international students are scared to get help because it could hinder their chances to stay in Canada. Another great thing Green's article does is give international students a voice. Thanks to this we can get a first hand opinion on how all of this truly affects them. The international students mentions how “If you mess up once, then your record is totally stained for the rest of your life” This is something than no other non international student has to go through and it's hard to get this level of detail on studies that just treat this challenges as numbers, percentages, and trends.  
